action ava marie de verne
media mogul visionary film director
and a woman of groundbreaking firsts
i've been thinking about you all day
the first black woman to win best
director at the sundance film festival
for her sensitive potent romantic drama
middle of nowhere the first black woman
to direct a 100 million dollar film
the colossal and ambitious youth fantasy
drama
a wrinkle in time
[Music]
and by directing the devastatingly
moving selma
a first in itself for being the first
major feature film
about martin luther king jr she became
the first black woman to have a film she
directed
oscar-nominated for best picture and
it's not hard to see why
that means protest that means march
that means disturb the peace that means
jail
that means risk and that is hard
[Applause]
but as de verne has pointed out herself
she is not the first black woman to make
films that deserve such praise what did
you think running off like that
what about casey lemons director of the
sumptuous melodrama
eve's bayou julie dash
with her languid reimagining of the
resilient sisterhood
of south american ghoulers and daughters
of the dust
boy got these places how about eugene
palsy
director of a dry white season an
unflinching look
at apartheid era south africa
but while de verne's more high-profile
work like selma
undoubtedly builds on the momentum these
women created
she deserves credit for far more than
just good timing but we
shall be victorious in our quest so what
is it that makes de vernay and her work
so trailblazing
the film that set divernay firmly on
this trailblazing path was the artful
and assured romantic drama middle of
nowhere
column regarding inmate number p48057
north hall level d derek j murray
duvernay brings warmth grace and empathy
to a story which follows ruby and her
routine visits
to her incarcerated husband derek can
you
even believe it i can't believe it
10 months early it's good news
it's great news however her loyalty is
challenged
after boarding the same bus as the
comely brian
played by a doe-eyed and irresistible
david oyelowo
i've been thinking about you all day
is that a problem this wasn't the first
film of duvernay's to focus
on the black female experience from
picking up her first camera
age 32 and directing her first ever
feature
the inspiring and insightful hip-hop
documentary called this is the life
duvernay instantly laid the groundwork
of what was to become
her brand of putting black women first
did you talk to friends office this
morning i called the emergency number
got an assistant
it's all set baby
[Music]
that's a lot of money ruby but middle of
nowhere wasn't just a tender romance
it was also a film that astutely
investigated
the unjust american prison system
something on which
duvernay would continue to shine a light
throughout her career
why don't y'all come on over we got we
got some phillips barbecue
got some cold beer we were just heading
out
the film also saw duvernay begin to form
what was to become
a regular filmmaking partnership with
cinematographer
bradford young who has worked with
duvernay ever since
young's trademark artistry in lighting
skin
and using underexposed light contribute
to the very
essence of all of duvernay's work making
black lives shine on screen
[Music]
this ain't right duvernay and oyelowo's
work in chemistry
saw them progress to selma we can do
this
we must do this duvernay's heart-rending
historical drama
charting the 1960s right to vote marches
to selma alabama
led by dr martin luther king jr played
in a career-best performance
by oriello but we must march it must
stand up
we must make a massive demonstration of
our moral certainty
selma was released just as eric garner
and michael brown's deaths
galvanized the black lives matter
movement meaning those seeking
additional context could look to the
cinema as the poignant reenactments
of the 1965 protests dully chimed
with present-day news duvernay's
profound
influence on the film cannot be
underestimated
originally handed a script spotlighting
president
lyndon b johnson she swiftly relegated
lbj to the background
ensuring mlk was king we see
children become victims of one of the
most vicious crimes ever perpetrated
against humanity within the walls of
their own church
with the rights to martin luther king's
speeches tied up by steven spielberg
duvernay rose to the challenge of
writing the powerful and rousing
speeches you hear in the film
they say to us that it is
unacceptable for more than 50 percent of
selma to be negro
and yet less than two percent of negroes
here being able to vote
and determine their own destiny as human
beings
always looking out for whose story is
going untold
duvernay titled the film selma as a
dedication to those who joined dr king
on the marches
to make the victory theirs and not just
his
thanks to duvernay's deft directing and
bradford's lustrous cinematography
selma's reenactments of those poignant
marches
are as stunning as they are devastating
[Music]
despite oscar-worthy work from oyelowo
and duvernay
selma left that year's oscars with only
one award
best original song a deserved win for
common and john legend
for their righteous instant anthem glory
thank you
but just looking at the oscar stage of
all black performers
looking out into a sea of white faces
was a reminder
of how few people of color make it into
the upper echelons of film
god bless you thank you thank you
the 13th amendment to the constitution
makes it
unconstitutional for someone to be held
as a slave
in other words it grants freedom
to all americans
there are exceptions including
criminals
after the success of selma came to
verne's vigorously intelligent
feature-length documentary 13th which
powerfully explores
the absurd fact that 97
of the current prison population never
stood trust
the 13th amendment says that hey except
for criminals everybody else is free
well now if you're criminalized
that doesn't apply to you her original
intention
was to show how prison works as a modern
day labour industry
but after interviewing crucial civil
rights activists
the historian in duvernay realized 13th
needed to go back further history is not
just
stuff that happens by accident we are
the products of the history that our
ancestors chose
if we're white so to clarify the power
and responsibility of film
she opens with the infamous 1915 film
from d w griffith birth of a nation
the film presenting ku klux klan members
as heroes
was considered the first ever
blockbuster profoundly influencing the
film industry
and american culture
birth of the nation remains one of the
most obscenely racist portrayals of
black people on screen
and juxtaposed with the other more
recent footage from 13th
de verne shows us how its reverberations
are still being felt today
in the treatment of black lives we have
been consistently being murdered
as a result of police aggression they
generally would excuse it
by calling us criminals duvernay's
career seems fueled by a mission to
dismantle the racist foundations
laid by godfather of film d w griffith
her work adds dynamics life and soul
to the black and brown people she puts
on screen
especially women and girls it's a
mission she's staying true to
she's even turned down an offer to
direct a certain superhero movie
the tremendously successful and proudly
afrofuturist
black panther showing that duvernay
wasn't about to stray from her lane
with lavish disney fantasy adventure a
wrinkle in time
duvernay was given a budget of 100
million dollars
the most she or any black woman had
enjoyed
the film reimagines madeline longle's
1962 book which sees quietly ferocious
meg
her hilariously prim but adorable
brother charles wallace
and gooey-eyed calvin save the world
and her father from an evil universe
take a moment to think about the youth
fantasy films of your childhood
maybe you were freaked out by the
terrifying german existentialism
of wolfgang peterson's never-ending
story
maybe you liked the weird fantasy world
of jim henson's labyrinth
did you say hello no i said hello but
that's close enough
90s kids might remember laughing at the
supernatural comedy of matilda
[Music]
while those who came of age after the
turn of the millennium
couldn't have avoided the block busting
dominance of the harry potter franchise
white am i right
[Music]
recognising this duvernay helped create
balance for black girls who rarely get
to be the hero
meg is front and center throughout
driving the narrative
do you trust me i trust you
okay wrinkle in time strategic centering
of a young black girl didn't garner the
critical acclaim
disney would have liked but as 82
percent of critics at the time were
white
and only 22 percent were women
perhaps they weren't the most receptive
audience
or perhaps part of true equality is the
right to make a film
that is ambitious but flawed without it
derailing your entire career
as other important directors have been
doing for decades
[Music]
her next project tackled the case of the
central park
five the superb
four-part drama series might be about a
specific
case but it's a familiar story for the
generations of black and brown men
who have endured the assumption of
criminality and have been branded as
wild animals
duvernay sensitively uses this
miscarriage of justice
as an extreme example that exposes all
the wider facets
of a biased criminal justice system hey
you got id
the case may be known as the central
park five but true to her principles
duvernay wanted to re-write history
while humanizing the boys
who had been portrayed as animals
the ambiguous title when they see us
invites us to question who they are and
who
us might be
[Music]
the fact that ava duvernay is the first
black woman to break
so many glass ceilings with her
visionary political and
personal films it's both calls for
celebration
and an indictment of an industry that
has kept artists like her at a distance
but while this image of a black woman
commanding a set of dozens of film
professionals is still
all too rare and action duvernate isn't
going anywhere
and she'll continue to follow in the
footsteps of other trailblazers
to forge new ground and make history
happen okay
[Music]
you